Feynman: I was invited to Washington to investigate the Challenger accident, which you presumably all know about. First of all, NASA has many projects. In this lecture I'm going to use the word 'NASA' always to mean just that work associated with the Shuttle, and I don't imply any other connections. Before I tell you about the Shuttle, I thought it would be interesting to you all to see the costume that I assumed in order to move among the natives without being too conspicuous in Washington. They wear this kind of coat because it's a little bit cold there - there's snow sometimes. They think it's because it's cold there, but, as a matter of fact, they wear such coats on the inside of their buildings, which are well heated. Further, it turns out that you can put this coat on to walk short distances - from one building to another - or from a building to a taxi, if it's any longer distance. However, they are not satisfied with this. They seem to have a strange fear of the cold, because on top of this they put other coats if they wish to step outside. Now that you've seen the equipment, I'm going to take it off. 

To remind you for just a moment about the Shuttle, the central part is the tank for fuel (liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen); the engine, which burns that fuel, is at the back end of the orbiter, which looks something like an airplane. The crew sits in the front of the orbiter. In order to boost the Shuttle in the beginning, there are two solid-core rockets, called 'SRBs' (for solid rocket boosters). They are ignited for about two minutes before they are discarded and later recovered in the sea. As most of you know, the story is that one of the SRBs failed. There was a leak in a joint between two sections. Hot gas leaked out of the joint and ultimately burned a hole in the side of the tank where the hydrogen was, and the flight was a failure. 

There's putty and other things, but the ultimate seal is supposed to be two rubber rings, called O-rings, which are approximately a quarter of an inch thick and lie on a circle 12 ft. in diameter - that's something like 37 ft. around. When the SRB was originally designed by the Morton Thiokol Company, it was expected that the pressure from the rocket would squash the O-rings so the joint would be securely sealed. What happened instead is, the joint is stronger than the wall (it's three times thicker), so that under pressure the wall bows outward, causing the joint to open a little - enough to lift the rubber O-rings off the seal area. This phenomenon is called 'joint rotation' in the lingo the engineers use, and it was discovered very early, when they were still designing, before the Shuttle flew. 

Although the pieces of rubber are called O-rings, they're not used the way O-rings are normally used. In ordinary circumstances, such as for sealing oil in the motor of an automobile, although there are sliding parts and rotating shafts, the gaps are always the same. An O-ring just sits there in a fixed position. But in the case of the Shuttle, the gap expands as the pressure builds up in the rocket. And to maintain the seal, the rubber has to expand fast enough to close the gap - in fractions of a second. Thus the resilience of the rubber became a very essential part of the design. When the Thiokol engineers were discovering these problems, they went to the Parker Seal Company, who manufactures the rubber, to ask for advice. The Parker Seal Company told Thiokol that O-rings were not meant to be used that way, so they could give no advice. 

Although it was known from nearly the beginning that the joint was not working as it was designed to, Thiokol kept struggling with it. They tried various fixes. But the fundamental problem was that the O-ring material lost its resilience at low temperatures. I took this stuff that I got out of your seal, and I put it in ice water. And I discovered that when you put some pressure on it for awhile and then undo it, it doesn’t stretch back. It stays the same dimension. In other words, there is no resilience in this particular material when it is at a temperature of 32 degrees. I believe that has some significance for our problem. 

For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for nature cannot be fooled. There was no way, without full understanding, that one could have confidence that conditions the next time might not produce erosion three times more severe than the time before. Nevertheless, officials fooled themselves into thinking they had such understanding and confidence, in spite of the peculiar variations from case to case. A mathematical model was made to calculate erosion. This was a model based not on physical understanding but on empirical curve fitting. To be more detailed, it was supposed a stream of hot gas impinged on the O-ring material, and the heat was determined at the point of stagnation (so far, with reasonable physical, thermodynamic laws). But to determine how much rubber eroded it was assumed this depended only on this heat by a formula suggested by data on a similar material. A logarithmic plot suggested a straight line, so it was supposed that the erosion varied as the .58 power of the heat, the .58 being determined by a nearest fit. At any rate, adjusting some other numbers, it was determined that the model agreed with the erosion (to depth of one-third the radius of the ring). There is nothing much so wrong with this as believing the answer! Uncertainties appear everywhere.