Part 1: The Atomic Hypothesis and the "Feel" of Physics
Source: Chapter 1: Atoms in Motion Teaching Pattern: Starting with the simplest possible idea that contains the most information, then expanding it through visualization. 

"If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only one sentence passed on to the next generations of creatures, what statement would contain the most information in the fewest words? I believe it is the atomic hypothesis (or the atomic fact, or whatever you wish to call it) that all things are made of atoms—little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another. In that one sentence, you will see, there is an enormous amount of information about the world, if just a little imagination and thinking are applied. 

To illustrate the power of the atomic idea, suppose that we have a drop of water a quarter of an inch on the side. If we look at it very closely we see nothing but water—smooth, continuous water. Even if we magnify it with the best optical microscope available—roughly two thousand times—then the water drop will be roughly forty feet across, about as big as a large room, and if we looked rather closely, we would still see relatively smooth water—but here and there small football-shaped things swimming back and forth. Very interesting. These are paramecia. You may stop at this point and get so curious about the paramecia with their wiggling cilia and twisting bodies that you go no further, except perhaps to magnify the paramecia still more and see inside. This, of course, is a subject for biology, but for the present we pass on and look still more closely at the water material itself, magnifying it two thousand times again. Now the drop of water extends about fifteen miles across, and if we look very closely at it we see a kind of teeming, something which no longer has a smooth appearance—it looks something like a crowd at a football game as seen from a very great distance. 

In order to see what this teeming is about, we will magnify it another two hundred and fifty times and we will see something similar to what is shown in the diagram. This is a picture of water magnified a billion times, but idealized in several ways. In the first place, the particles are drawn in a simple manner with sharp edges, which is inaccurate. Secondly, for simplicity, they are sketched almost schematically in a two-dimensional arrangement, but of course they are moving around in three dimensions. Notice that there are two kinds of 'blobs' or circles to represent the atoms of oxygen (black) and hydrogen (white), and that each oxygen has two hydrogens tied to it. (Each little group of an oxygen with its two hydrogens is called a molecule.) The picture is idealized further in that the real particles in nature are continually jiggling and bouncing, turning and twisting around one another. You will have to imagine this as a dynamic rather than a static picture. Another thing that cannot be illustrated in a drawing is the fact that the particles are 'stuck together'—that they attract each other, this one pulled by that one, etc. The whole group is 'glued together,' so to speak. On the other hand, the particles do not squeeze through each other. If you try to squeeze two of them too close together, they repel. 

The jiggling motion is what we represent as heat: when we increase the temperature, we increase the motion. If we heat the water, the jiggling increases and the volume between the atoms increases, and if the heating continues there comes a time when the pull between the molecules is not enough to hold them together and they do fly apart and become separated from one another. Of course, this is how we manufacture steam out of water—by increasing the temperature; the particles fly apart because of the increased motion. 

Now let us look at the surface of the water. Above the surface we find a number of things: First of all there are water molecules, as in steam. This is water vapor, which is always found above liquid water. (There is an equilibrium between the steam vapor and the water which will be described later.) In addition we find some other molecules—here two oxygen atoms stuck together by themselves, forming an oxygen molecule, there two nitrogen atoms also stuck together to make a nitrogen molecule. Air consists almost entirely of nitrogen, oxygen, some water vapor, and lesser amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, and other things. So above the water surface is the air, a gas, containing some water vapor. Now what is happening in this picture? The molecules in the water are always jiggling around. From time to time, one on the surface happens to be hit a little harder than usual, and gets knocked away. It is hard to see that happening in the picture because it is a still picture. But we can imagine that one molecule near the surface has just been hit and is flying out, or perhaps another one has been hit and is flying out. Thus, molecule by molecule, the water disappears—it evaporates. But if we close the vessel above, after a while we shall find a large number of molecules of water amongst the air molecules. From time to time, one of these vapor molecules comes flying down to the water and gets stuck again. So we see that what looks like a dead, uninteresting thing—a glass of water with a cover, that has been sitting there for perhaps twenty years—really contains a dynamic and interesting phenomenon which is going on all the time. To our eyes, our crude eyes, nothing is changing, but if we could see it a billion times magnified, we would see that from its own point of view it is always changing: molecules are leaving the surface, molecules are coming back. 

If we take the top of a vessel off and blow the moist air away, replacing it with dry air, then the number of molecules leaving is just the same as it was before, because this depends on the jiggling of the water, but the number coming back is greatly reduced because there are so many fewer water molecules above the water. Therefore, there are more going out than coming in, and the water evaporates. Hence, if you wish to evaporate water turn on the fan! 

Here is another example: Suppose we have a container with a piston in it, and we have some gas inside. The atoms are bouncing around, hitting the piston. Now, if we push the piston in slowly, we are compressing the gas. What happens to the temperature? The atoms are hitting the piston, and the piston is moving inward. When an atom hits a moving wall, it bounces off with more speed than it had before. (It is like a tennis ball hitting a forward-moving racket; it comes off faster.) So the atoms gain speed. Therefore, under slow compression, a gas will increase in temperature. Conversely, under slow expansion, it will decrease in temperature. 

So much for the description of solids, liquids, and gases from the atomic point of view. However, the atomic hypothesis also describes processes, and so we shall now look at a number of processes from an atomic standpoint. The first process that we shall look at is associated with the surface of the water. What happens at the surface of the water? We shall now make the picture more complicated—and more realistic—by imagining that the surface is in air. Figure 1–5 shows the surface of water in air. We see the water molecules as before, forming a body of liquid water, but now we also see the surface of the water. Above the surface we find a number of things: First of all there are water molecules, as in steam. This is water vapor, which is always found above liquid water. (There is an equilibrium between the steam vapor and the water which will be described later.) In addition we find some other molecules—here two oxygen atoms stuck together by themselves, forming an oxygen molecule, there two nitrogen atoms also stuck together to make a nitrogen molecule. Air consists almost entirely of nitrogen, oxygen, some water vapor, and lesser amounts of carbon dioxide, argon, and other things. So above the water surface is the air, a gas, containing some water vapor. Now what is happening in this picture? The molecules in the water are always jiggling around. From time to time, one on the surface happens to be hit a little harder than usual, and gets knocked away. It is hard to see that happening in the picture because it is a still picture. But we can imagine that one molecule near the surface has just been hit and is flying out, or perhaps another one has been hit and is flying out. Thus, molecule by molecule, the water disappears—it evaporates. But if we close the vessel above, after a while we shall find a large number of molecules of water amongst the air molecules. From time to time, one of these vapor molecules comes flying down to the water and gets stuck again. So we see that what looks like a dead, uninteresting thing—a glass of water with a cover, that has been sitting there for perhaps twenty years—really contains a dynamic and interesting phenomenon which is going on all the time. To our eyes, our crude eyes, nothing is changing, but if we could see it a billion times magnified, we would see that from its own point of view it is always changing: molecules are leaving the surface, molecules are coming back." 

Part 2: The Chess Game of Nature and Scientific Method
Source: Chapter 2: Basic Physics Teaching Pattern: Using a grand analogy (chess) to explain the scientific method, then breaking down complex forces into simple, relatable terms. 

"We have chosen to illustrate our point of view by the following analogy. Imagine that the complicated array of moving things which constitutes 'the world' is something like a great chess game being played by the gods, and we are observers of the game. We do not know what the rules of the game are; all we are allowed to do is to watch the playing. Of course, if we watch long enough, we may eventually catch on to a few of the rules. The rules of the game are what we mean by fundamental physics. Even if we knew every rule, however, we might not be able to understand why a particular move is made in the game, merely because it is too complicated and our minds are limited. If you know the rules of chess, you can watch a game and enjoy it. But if you are a grandmaster, you can understand why a move is made; you can see the strategy. In physics, we are trying to find the rules. 

At first the phenomena of nature were roughly divided into classes, like heat, electricity, mechanics, magnetism, properties of substances, chemical phenomena, light or optics, x-rays, nuclear physics, gravitation, meson phenomena, etc. However, the aim is to see complete nature as different aspects of one set of phenomena. That is the problem in basic theoretical physics today—to find the laws behind experiment; to amalgamate these classes. 

Let us consider some of the basic rules. Pressure: The collision of atoms with walls or whatever. If you have a lot of atoms hitting a wall, they push on it. That is pressure.  Wind: The drift of atoms if they are all moving in one direction on the average.  Heat: The random internal motions of atoms; the more motion, the more heat the system contains.  Sound: Waves of atoms of excess density.  When you speak, you push the air, and the push travels as a wave of denser and less dense air. Magnetism: The influence of charged atoms in relative motion.

The chemical properties of a substance depend only on the number of electrons. That is a remarkable fact. It means that if you know how many electrons an atom has, you know almost everything about how it will behave chemically. 

A more adequate representation of the situation is to say that the existence of the positive charge, in some sense, distorts, or creates a 'condition' in space, so that when we put the negative charge in, it feels a force. This potentiality for producing a force is called an electric field. When we put an electron in an electric field, we say it is 'pulled.' We then have two rules: (a) charges make a field, and (b) charges in fields have forces on them and move. 

Now, what keeps the electrons from simply falling into the nucleus? After all, opposite charges attract. This principle: If they were in the nucleus, we would know their position precisely, and the uncertainty principle would then require that they have a very large (but uncertain) momentum, i.e., a very large kinetic energy. With this energy they would break away from the nucleus. They make a compromise: they leave themselves a little room for this uncertainty and then jiggle with a certain amount of minimum motion in accordance with this rule. This is a quantum mechanical effect, and it is the reason atoms have size. If it were not for quantum mechanics, the atoms would collapse. 

Things which we used to consider as waves also behave like particles, and particles behave like waves; in fact everything behaves the same way. There is no distinction between a wave and a particle. So quantum mechanics unifies the idea of the field and its waves, and the particles, all into one. Now it is true that when the frequency is low, the field aspect of the phenomenon is more evident, or more useful as an approximate description in terms of everyday experiences. But as the frequency increases, the particle aspects of the phenomenon become more evident with the equipment with which we usually make the measurements. 

Quantum Electrodynamics (QED): The fundamental theory of the interaction of light and matter, electrons and photons, or electric field and charges. QED governs the basic rules for all ordinary phenomena except for gravitation and nuclear processes. QED predicts a lot of new things. In the first place, it predicts the magnetic moment of the electron to incredible accuracy. It is one of the most successful theories in physics. 

But let us return to the chess analogy. Suppose we are watching a chess game, and we see a pawn move forward two squares. We might formulate a rule: 'Pawns can move forward one or two squares on their first move.' Then we see a pawn capture a piece diagonally. We add to our rule: 'Pawns capture diagonally.' Then we see a special move called 'en passant.' We add that. Then we see a pawn reach the other side and become a queen. We are amazed. We thought we knew the rules, but the game is more subtle than we thought. So it is in physics. We think we have the rules, and then we find a new phenomenon that doesn't fit, and we have to change our rules. Or rather, we find that our rules were only an approximation, and the real rules are deeper and more beautiful. 

For example, for a long time we thought that mass was constant. A spinning top has the same weight as a still one. So a law was invented: mass is constant, independent of speed. That is now found to be incorrect: the mass does increase with velocity, but appreciable increases require velocities near that of light. A true law is: if an object moves less than a hundred miles a second, the mass is constant to within one part in a million. And, you see, in some approximate form is the correct law. So in practice, you see, you'd think that the new law made very little difference. Well, yes and no: for ordinary speeds, we can certainly forget it, and use the simple constant law as a good approximation. Yet for high speeds we are wrong, and the higher the speed, the more completely wrong. Finally, in a most interesting way, philosophically we are completely wrong with the approximate law: our entire picture of the world has to be altered when the mass is changed only by a little bit, if it isn't constant. That is the very peculiar thing about the philosophy, or the basic ideas, behind the laws: very small effects require profound changes in our ideas." 

Part 3: The Mystery of Quantum Behavior
Source: Chapter 6: Quantum Behavior Teaching Pattern: Isolating a single experiment (the double-slit) as the "only mystery," then walking through it step-by-step to show where common sense fails.

"We choose to examine a phenomenon which is impossible, absolutely impossible, to explain in any classical way, and which has in it the heart of quantum mechanics. In reality, it contains the only mystery. We cannot make the mystery go away by 'explaining' how it works. We will just tell you how it works. In telling you how it works we will have told you about the basic peculiarities of all quantum mechanics. 

The phenomenon we are going to describe is the interference of particles. We are going to describe an experiment with electrons. But before we do, let us describe an experiment with bullets, and then with water waves, so that you can see the difference. 

Experiment with Bullets: Suppose we have a machine gun that shoots a stream of bullets. In front of the gun is a wall with two holes in it. Behind that wall is a backstop that absorbs the bullets. We move a detector back and forth along the backstop to measure the probability that a bullet will arrive at a particular point. Now, if we close hole 2, we get a distribution P1. If we close hole 1, we get P2. If we open both holes, what do we get? We get P12 = P1 + P2. The probabilities just add. There is no interference. This is what we expect for particles. 

Experiment with Water Waves: Now suppose we have a source of water waves, a wall with two holes, and a detector that measures the intensity (height squared) of the waves. If we close hole 2, we get an intensity I1. If we close hole 1, we get I2. If we open both holes, do we get I1 + I2? No! We get interference. The waves from hole 1 and hole 2 add together. Sometimes the crest of one meets the crest of the other, and we get a big wave (constructive interference). Sometimes the crest of one meets the trough of the other, and they cancel out (destructive interference). So I12 is not I1 + I2. It has a wiggly pattern. This is what we expect for waves. 

Experiment with Electrons: Now we do the experiment with electrons. We have an electron gun, a wall with two holes, and a detector that counts electrons. We fire electrons one at a time. We wait for them to hit the detector. We measure the probability of arrival. If we close hole 2, we get P1. If we close hole 1, we get P2. If we open both holes, what do we get? Do we get P1 + P2, like the bullets? Or do we get interference, like the waves? The answer is: We get interference! The electrons arrive in lumps, like particles, but the probability of their arrival is distributed like the intensity of a wave. This is the mystery. 

How can this be? Does the electron go through hole 1 or hole 2? Let us try to find out. We put a light source behind the wall to see which hole the electron goes through. When an electron goes through a hole, it scatters light, and we see a flash. If we see a flash at hole 1, we know it went through hole 1. If we see a flash at hole 2, we know it went through hole 2. Now, what happens to the distribution? When we look to see which hole the electron goes through, the interference pattern disappears! We get P1 + P2, just like the bullets. But when we turn off the light and don't look, the interference pattern comes back. 

This is a very important point. The act of observing the electron changes the result. If we try to determine which path the electron takes, we destroy the interference. This is the uncertainty principle in action. To see the electron, we must bounce a photon off it. The photon gives the electron a kick, changing its momentum enough to destroy the delicate interference pattern. 

So, what is the electron? Is it a particle or a wave? It is neither. It is something else, something for which we have no name in our everyday language. We can describe it mathematically, but we cannot visualize it. We must accept nature as she is, absurd from the point of view of common sense, but perfectly consistent in her own way. 

Feynman's conclusion on this matter is famous: 'I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics.' Do not keep saying to yourself, if you can possibly avoid it, 'But how can it be like that?' because you will get 'down the drain', into a blind alley from which nobody has yet escaped. Nobody knows how it can be like that. The only thing we can do is to calculate the probabilities using the rules of quantum mechanics, and those rules work perfectly. 

The rule for calculating the probability is this: The probability of an event is the square of the absolute value of a complex number called the probability amplitude. For the double-slit experiment, the amplitude for the electron to arrive at a point is the sum of the amplitude for it to go through hole 1 and the amplitude for it to go through hole 2. Let a1 be the amplitude for hole 1 and a2 be the amplitude for hole 2. Then the total amplitude is a1 + a2. The probability is |a1 + a2|^2. This is not |a1|^2 + |a2|^2. There is a cross term, 2 Re(a1* a2), which gives the interference. This is the mathematical essence of the mystery.

If you ask, 'But how does the electron know whether the other hole is open or closed?' the answer is: It doesn't 'know' in any conscious sense. The wave function, which describes the probability amplitude, simply extends through both holes. The presence of the second hole changes the boundary conditions for the wave function, and thus changes the interference pattern. If you put a detector at one hole, you change the boundary conditions again, and the wave function collapses to one hole or the other. 

This is the way nature is. It is strange, but it is true. And the beauty of physics is that we can discover these strange truths, even if we cannot fully comprehend them with our limited human intuition. We have the mathematics, and we have the experiments, and they agree. That is enough. That is science.